When he was young my father shot out his best friend’s eye
with a BB gun. That is what he told us. “One foolish moment
and, Jesus, if I could take it back, I would.” He winced, shaking his fist as if it held a rattle. “It eats me alive,” he said. “I
mean to tell you that it absolutely tears me apart.”

On one of our summer visits to his hometown, my father
took us to meet this guy, a shoe salesman whose milky pupil
hugged the corner of his mangled socket. I watched the two
men shake hands and turned away, sickened and ashamed by
what my father had done.

Our next-door neighbor received a BB gun for his twelfth birthday and accepted it as a personal challenge to stalk and
maim any living creature: sunbathing cats, sparrows, slugs,
and squirrels — if it moved, he shot it. I thought this was an
excellent idea, but every time | raised the gun to my shoulder, I saw my father’s half-blind friend stumbling forth with
an armload of Capezios. What would it be like to live with

that sort of guilt? How could my father look himself in the
mirror without throwing up?

While watching television one afternoon my sister Tiffany
stabbed me in the eye with a freshly sharpened pencil. The
blood was copious, and I rode to the hospital knowing that if
I was blinded, my sister would be my slave for the rest of her
life. Never for one moment would I let her forget what she’d
done to me. There would be no swinging cocktail parties in
her future, no poolside barbeques or episodes of carefree
laughter, not one moment of joy —I would make sure of
that. I’d planned my vengeance so thoroughly that I was almost disappointed when the doctor announced that this was
nothing but a minor puncture wound, located not on but beneath the eye.

“Take a look at your brother’s face,” my father said, pointing to my Band-Aid. “You could have blinded him for life!
Your own brother, a Cyclops, is that what you want?” Tiffany’s
suffering eased my pain for an hour or two, but then I began
to feel sorry for her. “Every time you reach for a pencil, I
want you to think about what you've done to your brother,”
my father said. “I want you to get on your knees and beg him
to forgive you.”

There are only so many times a person can apologize before it becomes annoying. I lost interest long before the bandage was removed, but not my father. By the time he was
finished, Tiffany couldn’t lift a dull crayon without breaking
into tears. Her pretty, suntanned face assumed the characteristics of a wrinkled, grease-stained bag. Six years old and the
girl was broken.

Danger was everywhere and it was our father’s lifelong
duty to warn us. Attending the country club’s Fourth of July
celebration, we were told how one of his Navy buddies had
been disfigured for life when a cherry bomb exploded in his


lap. “Blew his balls right off the map,” he said. “Take a second and imagine what that must have felt like!” Racing to
the farthest edge of the golf course, I watched the remainder
of the display with my hands between my legs.

Fireworks were hazardous, but thunderstorms were even
worse. “I had a friend, used to be a very bright, good-looking
guy. He was on top of the world until the day he got struck
by lightning. It caught him right between the eyes while he
was trout fishing and cooked his brain just like you’d roast a
chicken. Now he’s got a metal plate in his forehead and can’t
even chew his own food; everything has to be put in a
blender and taken through a straw.”

If the lightning was going to get me, it would have to penetrate walls. At the first hint of a storm I ran to the basement, crouching beneath a table and covering my head with
a blanket. Those who watched from their front porches were
fools. “The lightning can be attracted by a wedding ring or
” my father said. “The moment you let down your guard is guaranteed to be the day it

even the fillings in your teeth,

strikes.”

In junior high I signed up for shop class, and our first assignment was to build a napkin holder. “You're not going to
be using a table saw, are you” my father asked. “I knew a
guy, a kid about your size, who was using a table saw when
the blade came loose, flew out of the machine, and sliced his
face right in half.” Using his index finger, my father drew an
imaginary line from his forehead to his chin. “The guy survived, but nobody wanted anything to do with him. He
turned into an alcoholic and wound up marrying a Chinese
woman he’d ordered through a catalog. Think about it.” I
did.

My napkin holder was made from found boards and, once
finished, weighed in at close to seven pounds. My bookshelves were even worse. “The problem with a hammer,” I

was told, “is that the head can fly off at any moment and,
boy, let me tell you, you’ve never imagined pain like that.”

After a while we began to wonder if my father had any
friends who could still tie their own shoes or breathe without
the aid of a respirator. With the exception of the shoe sales-
man, we'd never seen any of these people, only heard about
them whenever one of us attempted to deep-fry chicken or
operate the garbage disposal. “I’ve got a friend who buys a
set of gloves and throws one of them away. He lost his right
hand doing the exact same thing you're doing. He had his
arm down the drain when the cat rubbed against the switch
to the garbage disposal. Now he’s wearing clip-on ties and
having the restaurant waiters cut up his steak. Is that the
kind of life you want for yourself?”

He allowed me to mow the lawn only because he was too
cheap to pay a landscaper and didn’t want to do it himself.
“What happened,” he said, “is that the guy slipped, probably
on a pile of crap, and his leg got caught up in the blade. He
found his foot, carried it to the hospital, but it was too late to
sew it back on. Can you imagine that? The guy drove fifteen,
twenty miles with his foot in his lap.”

Regardless of the heat, I mowed the lawn wearing long
pants, knee-high boots, a football helmet, and a pair of
goggles. Before starting, I scouted the lawn for rocks and dog
feces, slowly combing the area as if it were mined. Even then
I pushed the mower haltingly, always fearing that this next
step might be my last.

Nothing bad ever happened, and within a few years I was
mowing in shorts and sneakers, thinking of the supposed
friend my father had used to illustrate his warning. I imagined this man jumping into his car and pressing on the accelerator with his bloody stump, a warm foot settled in his
lap like a sleeping puppy. Why hadn’t he just called an ambulance to come pick him up? How, in his shock, had he

thought to search the weeds for his missing foot? It didn’t add

up.

I waited until my junior year of high school to sign up for
driver’s education. Before taking to the road, we sat in the
darkened classroom, watching films that might have been
written and directed by my father. Don’t do it, I thought,
watching the prom couple attempt to pass a lumbering dump
truck. Every excursion ended with the young driver wrapped
around a telephone pole or burned beyond recognition, the

camera focusing in on a bloody corsage littering the side of the highway.

I drove a car no faster than I pushed the lawn mower, and
the instructor soon lost patience.

“That license is going to be your death warrant,” my father said on the day I received my learner’s permit. “You're
going to get out there and kill someone, and the guilt is going to tear your heart out.”

The thought of killing myself had slowed me down to five
miles per hour. The thought of killing someone else stopped
me completely.

My mother had picked me up from a play rehearsal one
rainy night when, cresting a hill, the car ran over something
it shouldn’t have. This was not a brick or a misplaced boot
but some living creature that cried out when caught beneath
the tire. “Shit,” my mother whispered, tapping her forehead
against the steering wheel. “Shit, shit shit.” We covered our
heads against the rain and searched the darkened street until
we found an orange cat coughing up blood into the gutter.

“You killed me,” the cat said, pointing at my mother with
its flattened paw. “Here I had so much to live for, but now
it’s over, my whole life wiped out just like that.” The cat
wheezed rhythmically before closing its eyes and dying.

“Shit,” my mother repeated. We walked door to door until
finding the cat’s owner, a kind and understanding woman

whose young daughter shared none of her qualities. “You
killed my cat,” she screamed, sobbing into her mother’s skirt.
“You're mean and you’re ugly and you killed my cat.”

“She’s at that age,” the woman said, stroking the child’s
hair.

My mother felt bad enough without the lecture that
awaited her at home. “That could have been a child!” my father shouted. “Think about that the next time you’re tearing
down the street searching for kicks.” He made it sound as if
my mother ran down cats for sport. “You think this is funny,”
he said, “but we'll see who’s laughing when you're behind
bars awaiting trial for manslaughter.” I received a variation
on the same speech after sideswiping a mailbox. Despite
my mother’s encouragement, I surrendered my permit and
never drove again. My nerves just couldn’t take it. It seemed
much safer to hitchhike.

My father objected when I moved to Chicago, and waged
a full-fledged campaign of terror when I announced I would
be moving to New York. “New York! Are you out of your
mind? You might as well take a razor to your throat because,
let me tell you something, those New Yorkers are going to eat
you alive.” He spoke of friends who had been robbed and
bludgeoned by packs of roving gangs and sent me newspaper
clippings detailing the tragic slayings of joggers and vacationing tourists. “This could be you!” he wrote in the margins.

We lived in New York for several years when, traveling upstate to attend a wedding, I stopped in my father’s hometown.
We hadn’t visited since our grandmother moved in with us,
and I felt my way around with a creepy familiarity. I found
my father’s old apartment, but his friend’s shoe store had
been converted into a pool hall. When I called to tell him
about it, my father said, “What shoe store? What are you
talking about?”


“The place where your friend worked,” I said. “You remember, the guy whose eye you shot out.”

“Frank?” he said. “I didn’t shoot his eye out; the guy was
born that way.”

My father visits me now in New York. We'll walk through
Washington Square, where he’ll yell, “Get a look at the ugly

mug on that one!” referring to a three-hundred-pound biker with grinning skulls tattooed like a choker around his neck.
A young man in Central Park is photographing his girlfriend, and my father races to throw himself into the picture.
“All right, sweetheart,” he says, placing his arm around the
startled victim, “it’s time to get comfortable.” I cower as he
marches into posh grocery stores, demanding to speak to the
manager. “Back home I can get this exact same cantaloupe
for less than half this price,” he says. The managers invariably suggest that he do just that. He screams at waiters and
cuts in line at tony restaurants. “I have a friend,” I tell him,
“who lost his right arm snapping his fingers at a waiter.”
“Oh, you kids,” he says. “Not a one of you has got so much
as a teaspoon of gumption. I don’t know where you got it
from, but in the end, it’s going to kill you.”
