“‘That woman Estelle,’” the note reads, “‘is partly the reason why
George Sharp and I are separated today.’ Dirty crepe-de-Chine wrapper,
hotel bar, Wilmington RR, 9:45 a.m. August Monday morning.”
Since the note is in my notebook, it presumably has some meaning to
me. I study it for a long while. At first I have only the most general notion
of what I was doing on an August Monday morning in the bar of the hotel
across from the Pennsylvania Railroad station in Wilmington, Delaware
(waiting for a train? missing one? 1960? 1961? why Wilmington?), but I
do remember being there. The woman in the dirty crepe-de-Chine wrapper
had come down from her room for a beer, and the bartender had heard
before the reason why George Sharp and she were separated today.
“Sure,” he said, and went on mopping the floor. “You told me.” At the
other end of the bar is a girl. She is talking, pointedly, not to the man beside her but to a cat lying in the triangle of sunlight cast through the open
door. She is wearing a plaid silk dress from Peck & Peck, and the hem is
coming down.
Here is what it is: The girl has been on the Eastern Shore, and now
she is going back to the city, leaving the man beside her, and all she can
see ahead are the viscous summer sidewalks and the 3 a.m. long-distance
calls that will make her lie awake and then sleep drugged through all
the steaming mornings left in August (1960? 1961?). Because she must
go directly from the train to lunch in New York, she wishes that she
had a safety pin for the hem of the plaid silk dress, and she also wishes
that she could forget about the hem and the lunch and stay in the cool
bar that smells of disinfectant and malt and make friends with the
woman in the crepe-de-Chine wrapper. She is afflicted by a little selfpity, and she wants to compare Estelles. That is what that was all
about.
Why did I write it down? In order to remember, of course, but exactly
what was it I wanted to remember? How much of it actually happened?
Did any of it? Why do I keep a notebook at all? It is easy to deceive oneself
on all those scores. The impulse to write things down is a peculiarly compulsive one, inexplicable to those who do not share it, useful only accidentally, only secondarily, in the way that any compulsion tries to justify
itself. I suppose that it begins or does not begin in the cradle. Although I
have felt compelled to write things down since I was five years old, I doubt
that my daughter ever will, for she is a singularly blessed and accepting
child, delighted with life exactly as life presents itself to her, unafraid to go
to sleep and unafraid to wake up. Keepers of private notebooks are a different breed altogether, lonely and resistant rearrangers of things, anxious
malcontents, children afflicted apparently at birth with some presentiment
of loss.
My first notebook was a Big Five tablet, given to me by my mother
with the sensible suggestion that I stop whining and learn to amuse myself by writing down my thoughts. She returned the tablet to me a few
years ago; the first entry is an account of a woman who believed
herself to be freezing to death in the Arctic night, only to find, when day
broke, that she had stumbled onto the Sahara Desert, where she
would die of the heat before lunch. I have no idea what turn of a fiveyear-old’s mind could have prompted so insistently “ironic” and exotic a
story, but it does reveal a certain predilection for the extreme which
has dogged me into adult life; perhaps if I were analytically inclined I
would find it a truer story than any I might have told about Donald Johnson’s birthday party or the day my cousin Brenda put Kitty Litter in the
aquarium.
So the point of my keeping a notebook has never been, nor is it now,
to have an accurate factual record of what I have been doing or thinking.
That would be a different impulse entirely, an instinct for reality which I
sometimes envy but do not possess. At no point have I ever been able successfully to keep a diary; my approach to daily life ranges from the
grossly negligent to the merely absent, and on those few occasions when I
have tried dutifully to record a day’s events, boredom has so overcome
me that the results are mysterious at best. What is this business about
“shopping, typing piece, dinner with E, depressed”? Shopping for what?
Typing what piece? Who is E? Was this “E” depressed, or was I depressed?
Who cares?
In fact I have abandoned altogether that kind of pointless entry; instead
I tell what some would call lies. “That’s simply not true,” the members of
my family frequently tell me when they come up against my memory of a
shared event. “The party was not for you, the spider was not a black
widow, it wasn’t that way at all.” Very likely they are right, for not only
have I always had trouble distinguishing between what happened and
what merely might have happened, but I remain unconvinced that the distinction, for my purposes, matters. The cracked crab that I recall having
for lunch the day my father came home from Detroit in 1945 must certainly be embroidery, worked into the day’s pattern to lend verisimilitude; I was ten years old and would not now remember the cracked crab.
The day’s events did not turn on cracked crab. And yet it is precisely that
fictitious crab that makes me see the afternoon all over again, a home
movie run all too often, the father bearing gifts, the child weeping, an exercise in family love and guilt. Or that is what it was to me. Similarly,
perhaps it never did snow that August in Vermont; perhaps there never
were flurries in the night wind, and maybe no one else felt the ground
hardening and summer already dead even as we pretended to bask in it,
but that was how it felt to me, and it might as well have snowed, could
have snowed, did snow.
How it felt to me: that is getting closer to the truth about a notebook. I sometimes delude myself about why I keep a notebook, imagine
that some thrifty virtue derives from preserving everything observed. See
enough and write it down, I tell myself, and then some morning when
the world seems drained of wonder, some day when I am only going
through the motions of doing what I am supposed to do, which is write —
on that bankrupt morning I will simply open my notebook and there it
will all be, a forgotten account with accumulated interest, paid passage
back to the world out there: dialogue overheard in hotels and elevators
and at the hatcheck counter in Pavillon (one middle-aged man shows his
hat check to another and says, “That’s my old football number”); impressions of Bettina Aptheker and Benjamin Sonnenberg and Teddy
(“Mr. Acapulco”) Stauffer; careful aperçus1 about tennis bums and
failed fashion models and Greek shipping heiresses, one of whom taught
me a significant lesson (a lesson I could have learned from F. Scott
Fitzgerald, but perhaps we all must meet the very rich for ourselves) by
asking, when I arrived to interview her in her orchid-filled sitting room
on the second day of a paralyzing New York blizzard, whether it was
snowing outside.
I imagine, in other words, that the notebook is about other people.
But of course it is not. I have no real business with what one stranger said
to another at the hatcheck counter in Pavillon; in fact I suspect that the line
“That’s my old football number” touched not my own imagination at all,
but merely some memory of something once read, probably “The EightyYard Run.” Nor is my concern with a woman in a dirty crepe-de-Chine
wrapper in a Wilmington bar. My stake is always, of course, in the unmentioned girl in the plaid silk dress. Remember what it was to be me: that is
always the point.
It is a difficult point to admit. We are brought up in the ethic that 10
others, any others, all others, are by definition more interesting than
ourselves; taught to be diffident, just this side of self-effacing. (“You’re
the least important person in the room and don’t forget it,” Jessica Mitford’s governess would hiss in her ear on the advent of any social occasion; I copied that into my notebook because it is only recently that I
have been able to enter a room without hearing some such phrase in my
inner ear.) Only the very young and the very old may recount their
dreams at breakfast, dwell upon self, interrupt with memories of
beach picnics and favorite Liberty lawn dresses and the rainbow trout
in a creek near Colorado Springs. The rest of us are expected, rightly,
to affect absorption in other people’s favorite dresses, other people’s
trout.
And so we do. But our notebooks give us away, for however dutifully
we record what we see around us, the common denominator of all we see
is always, transparently, shamelessly, the implacable “I.” We are not talking here about the kind of notebook that is patently for public consumption, a structural conceit for binding together a series of graceful pensées;
we are talking about something private, about bits of the mind’s string
too short to use, an indiscriminate and erratic assemblage with meaning
only for its maker.
And sometimes even the maker has difficulty with the meaning. There
does not seem to be, for example, any point in my knowing for the rest of
my life that, during 1964, 720 tons of soot fell on every square mile of
New York City, yet there it is in my notebook, labeled “fact.” Nor do I
really need to remember that Ambrose Bierce liked to spell Leland Stanford’s name “£eland $tanford” or that “smart women almost always
wear black in Cuba,” a fashion hint without much potential for practical
application. And does not the relevance of these notes seem marginal at
best?:


coat was often worn by Mrs. Minnie S. Brooks when giving lectures on

her teapot collection.”

Redhead getting out of car in front of Beverly Wilshire Hotel, chinchilla

stole, Vuitton bags with tags reading:

mrs. lou fox
hotel sahara
vegas
Well, perhaps not entirely marginal. As a matter of fact, Mrs. Minnie S.
Brooks and her mandarin coat pull me back into my own childhood,
for although I never knew Mrs. Brooks and did not visit Inyo County
until I was thirty, I grew up in just such a world, in houses cluttered with
Indian relics and bits of gold ore and ambergris and the souvenirs my
Aunt Mercy Farnsworth brought back from the Orient. It is a long way
from that world to Mrs. Lou Fox’s world, where we all live now, and is it
not just as well to remember that? Might not Mrs. Minnie S. Brooks help
me to remember what I am? Might not Mrs. Lou Fox help me to remember what I am not?
But sometimes the point is harder to discern. What exactly did I have
in mind when I noted down that it cost the father of someone I know
$650 a month to light the place on the Hudson in which he lived before
the Crash? What use was I planning to make of this line by Jimmy Hoffa:
“I may have my faults, but being wrong ain’t one of them”? And although I think it interesting to know where the girls who travel with the
Syndicate have their hair done when they find themselves on the West
Coast, will I ever make suitable use of it? Might I not be better off just
passing it on to John O’Hara? What is a recipe for sauerkraut doing in
my notebook? What kind of magpie keeps this notebook? “He was born
the night the Titanic went down.” That seems a nice enough line, and I
even recall who said it, but is it not really a better line in life than it could
ever be in fiction?
But of course that is exactly it: not that I should ever use the line, but 15
that I should remember the woman who said it and the afternoon I heard
it. We were on her terrace by the sea, and we were finishing the wine left
from lunch, trying to get what sun there was, a California winter sun.
The woman whose husband was born the night the Titanic went down
wanted to rent her house, wanted to go back to her children in Paris. I
remember wishing that I could afford the house, which cost $1,000 a

month. “Someday you will,” she said lazily. “Someday it all comes.” There
in the sun on her terrace it seemed easy to believe in someday, but later I
had a low-grade afternoon hangover and ran over a black snake on the
way to the supermarket and was flooded with inexplicable fear when I
heard the checkout clerk explaining to the man ahead of me why she
was finally divorcing her husband. “He left me no choice,” she said
over and over as she punched the register. “He has a little seven-monthold baby by her, he left me no choice.” I would like to believe that my
dread then was for the human condition, but of course it was for me, because I wanted a baby and did not then have one and because I wanted to
own the house that cost $1,000 a month to rent and because I had a
hangover.
It all comes back. Perhaps it is difficult to see the value in having one’s
self back in that kind of mood, but I do see it; I think we are well advised
to keep on nodding terms with the people we used to be whether we find
them attractive company or not. Otherwise they turn up unannounced and
surprise us, come hammering on the mind’s door at 4 a.m. of a bad night
and demand to know who deserted them, who betrayed them, who is
going to make amends. We forget all too soon the things we thought we
could never forget. We forget the loves and the betrayals alike, forget what
we whispered and what we screamed, forget who we were. I have already
lost touch with a couple of people I used to be; one of them, a seventeenyear-old, presents little threat, although it would be of some interest to me
to know again what it feels like to sit on a river levee drinking vodka-andorange-juice and listening to Les Paul and Mary Ford and their echoes sing
“How High the Moon” on the car radio. (You see I still have the scenes,
but I no longer perceive myself among those present, no longer could even
improvise the dialogue.) The other one, a twenty-three-year-old, bothers
me more. She was always a good deal of trouble, and I suspect she will
reappear when I least want to see her, skirts too long, shy to the point of
aggravation, always the injured party, full of recriminations and little
hurts and stories I do not want to hear again, at once saddening me and
angering me with her vulnerability and ignorance, an apparition all the
more insistent for being so long banished.
It is a good idea, then, to keep in touch, and I suppose that keeping in
touch is what notebooks are all about. And we are all on our own when it
comes to keeping those lines open to ourselves: your notebook will never
help me, nor mine you. “So what’s new in the whiskey business?” What
could that possibly mean to you? To me it means a blonde in a Pucci
bathing suit sitting with a couple of fat men by the pool at the Beverly Hills
Hotel. Another man approaches, and they all regard one another in silence
for a while. “So what’s new in the whiskey business?” one of the fat men
finally says by way of welcome, and the blonde stands up, arches one foot

and dips it in the pool, looking all the while at the cabaña where Baby Pignatari is talking on the telephone. That is all there is to that, except that
several years later I saw the blonde coming out of Saks Fifth Avenue in
New York with her California complexion and a voluminous mink coat. In
the harsh wind that day she looked old and irrevocably tired to me, and
even the skins in the mink coat were not worked the way they were doing
them that year, not the way she would have wanted them done, and there is
the point of the story. For a while after that I did not like to look in the mirror, and my eyes would skim the newspapers and pick out only the deaths,
the cancer victims, the premature coronaries, the suicides, and I stopped
riding the Lexington Avenue IRT because I noticed for the first time that all
the strangers I had seen for years—the man with the seeing-eye dog, the
spinster who read the classified pages every day, the fat girl who always got
off with me at Grand Central—looked older than they once had.
It all comes back. Even that recipe for sauerkraut: even that brings it
back. I was on Fire Island when I first made that sauerkraut, and it was
raining, and we drank a lot of bourbon and ate the sauerkraut and went
to bed at ten, and I listened to the rain and the Atlantic and felt safe. I
made the sauerkraut again last night and it did not make me feel any
safer, but that is, as they say, another story. 