Before moving to New York, I often imagined myself living in a sparsely furnished loft space, breaking bread with the Young Turks I regularly saw pictured in the Sunday Times. These were the mavericks who made their own rules and looked, as was the current fashion, as though they'd just been yanked feetfirst through a narrow pipe. I myself was not particularly young or Turkish and had no reason to believe that such people might seek me out. Still, though, these were the expectations that preceded a life in Manhattan. If success was too much to ask for, I was willing to accept a two-bedroom apartment and a couple of talented pen pals. When it became clear that even this was beyond my grasp, I settled for a cluttered one-bedroom and a seventy-five-year-old Italian woman, who ungraciously settled for me in return.

Our relationship was stormy right from the start, and had she lived far away, I probably would have called it quits after our first few meetings. As it happened, she lived right across the hall, and even when we tried, there was no escaping each other. We were neighbors for seven years, and not a day passed when I didn't wonder how I could love and hate her so strongly and equally. In the best of times, I was charmed by her unchecked rage and enormous capacity for cruelty. In the worst of times, she reminded me too much of myself, and I worried that I might have to choke the life out of her.

It was our first morning in the SoHo apartment, and my boyfriend, Hugh, had gone off to work. I was unpacking dishes when someone pounded on the door, shouting, "I know you're in there," and "Open up, you bastard." I assumed it was a policeman searching for the former tenant, and I looked through the peephole to find an elderly, extremely agitated woman holding a foil-covered aluminum tray. She was small, the size of a stocky ten-year-old boy, and she wore a soiled gray sweat suit that fit tightly through the chest and hips.

I opened the door, and the woman looked me up and down. She asked me who the fuck I was, and then, without waiting for an answer, she plowed ahead, saying that everyone called her Rocky and that she'd lived across the hall for fifty years, the implication being that she had seniority, that this was her floor, and that I could forget about the coup I was obviously plotting. The landlord was a man named Francis, and, according to her, the two of them were close. "I've known that Irish bastard since before you was born, and every day we talk on the phone. Capisce?" She removed her thick glasses and fingered the duct tape used to mend the stems. "Cause any trouble in this building and I'll kick you up the ass so hard I'll lose my shoe."

I looked down at her feet, trying to imagine one of her tiny, unlaced sneakers sunk to the heel inside my rectum.

"That's right," she said. "Get yourself a good eyeful, you bastard."

She spoke like one of the Dead End Kids, those fatherless East Side delinquents who costarred in a series of old Warner Brothers movies. She said terlet instead of toilet. She cooked with olive earl and addressed groups of two or more as "youse."

"Here," she said, handing over the foil-wrapped tray. "I made you some of my famous eggplant with tomato gravy."

I suggested that she shouldn't have gone through all the trouble, and she waved me off, saying, "I ate some last night, and all morning I've been as sick as a dog. Go ahead, take it."

She beckoned me close as if to share a confidence, then raised her voice, shouting, "Anthony, that old bastard next door, would die if he knew I was giving this to youse. His wife has the Alfheimer, so whoop de shit, right? She forgot how to put a fucking pot on the stove, so all week he's been up my ass, begging me for a plate of eggplant. He gets social security plus a $300-a-month railroad pension, and now he expects me to feed him? The cheap son of a bitch. I told him to stick it up his ass."

She'd begun a character assassination on another one of our neighbors when a door opened and an athletic young man stepped into the hall. He nodded in our direction, and Rocky regarded him coolly as he made his way down the stairs. "That bastard kept me up until five o'clock in the morning," she said. "Every time I laid down, I could hear him on the terlet, shitting his guts out." She pressed the palm of her hand against her mouth and blew against it, creating the sound of a sputtering motorboat. "Pluuuu, pluuuuuuuu."

I'm a real sucker for potty noises, especially when they're made by adults. Rocky's childishness was appealing, but the sight of her trumpeting cheeks was even funnier.

"See," she said. "I got you going. I made you laugh."

The pattern was set, and we would have essentially the same conversation every day for the next seven years.

"What, are you asleep? Get up, you lazy Greek bastard. I've got something to give you."

On an average morning, Rocky would call at around 7:00 A.M. and berate me for sleeping so late. If I explained that I'd been up until four, she'd claim to have been up until five, massaging her swollen leg or suffering another bout of colitis, the latter usually accompanied by such details as, "I shit six times, and I think I sprained my asshole." The coarser digestive problems were never traced to her caustic meatball quiche or famous spaghetti-and-baked-bean casserole but, rather, to a crippling foreign virus spread by a Chinese ConEd employee or a Puerto Rican cashier. Every day she gave me one of her foil-wrapped specialties, and every night I tossed it into the garbage can. It was wasteful, but there was no tactful way of refusing her gifts. She was always offering me something, and I always had to come and get it right now. After hanging up, I'd go back to sleep for a few hours, ignoring her second and third phone calls and knocking on her door around noon. "You ungrateful bastard, you," she'd say. "You're lucky I don't box your fucking ears." This translated to "Welcome! Please enter my home for refreshment and casual conversation."

During the time that I knew her, Rocky spent most of her waking hours perched on the radiator beneath her living-room window. This was the vantage point from which she patrolled our block, and very little escaped her attention.

On a typical day, it might be noted that the woman in 6B stepped out of a cab with a colored guy, that the newlyweds on the third floor tried to grill hamburgers on the fire escape, or that the super wasted half an hour washing his cousin's moped. If William tripped on the front stairs, he was obviously addicted to painkillers. Should Doris take a car service to Staten Island, it meant that she was skimming money from her mother's social-security check. Denial was futile, as, aside from being one of the country's foremost chefs, Rocky was also the smartest woman in the world. She observed those around her and reported her findings to the landlord, who lived several blocks away and couldn't have cared less. Espionage allowed her to feel important, and the tattling left her with a steady stream of enemies she could rail against in the downtime. As my mother would have said, she loved to stir the turd.

I told her this once, and she laughed, saying, "Stir the turd. That's cute. I like that."

I'd been receiving regular, unwanted wake-up calls for more than a year when Rocky phoned one morning, saying something I couldn't quite understand. She'd often boasted that she'd "taken two strokes," and, on hearing her slurred voice, I worried that she might have just taken a third. She met me at the door to her apartment, and I noticed that the lower half of her face was puckered and misshapen. It seemed there had been an accident, and she needed me to do her a favor. She'd been at her window, watching the street below, and when the super of a neighboring building had tossed a lit cigarette into one of our trash cans, she'd yelled at him with such force that she'd blown her lower plate right out of her mouth.

"Itch down in da shwubs," she said. "Go ged it."

I found her damp, plastic-gummed dentures lying in the dirt, unbroken by their five-story fall, and returned them to her, at which point she popped the unwashed plate back into her mouth and ran to the window, threatening to have him "whacked" by her friends in the mafia.

Looking around Rocky's sparsely furnished apartment, it was hard to believe she'd occupied the same three rooms since 1942. Unlike many women her age, she was not a collector. Sentimentality struck her as grotesque, and she returned all gifts to their senders accompanied by a brief anti-thank-you note, my favorite reading, "Dear Theresa, I've got mops better than this wig." The living room was furnished with a plastic-covered sofa that faced her only concession to extravagance: a tower of three television sets, stacked one on top of another. During the afternoons, she'd tune at least two of them to ABC, and on my days off we'd spend a few hours watching All My Children and One Life to Live. Or rather, I would watch them and narrate the activity to Rocky, who sat on the radiator with her head stuck out the window. Whenever there was a break in the dialogue, it was my job to fill in the blanks, saying, "Adam is planting a gun in Brooke's suitcase" or "Vicki is signing the divorce papers."

The romantic entanglements and petty betrayals reminded her of events in her own life, and she enjoyed speculating on what she might do were she buried alive or kidnapped on her wedding day. I never doubted that she could claw her way out of a coffin, but I felt she was definitely out of her league when it came to solving any sort of family problem. Her children had grown up sleeping on chairs in the kitchen and living room, and, from what I could gather, they couldn't leave home fast enough. She'd written off her son over a fifty-dollar debt, and only one of her two daughters was speaking to her.

When her youngest turned fifteen and started thinking of herself as attractive, Rocky had strapped the girl to a chair and dyed her hair the flat, gray color of an old nickel. "She thought she was hot stuff, trotting around in a skirt up to her pussy, but I showed her. I was the pretty one in the family. Me, not Flossie."

Flossie. The girl was doomed right from the start.

"Lots of funny things happen when you're a mother," she'd say. "I should write a book."

Why Rocky's Friendship Was Sometimes Taxing

When Rocky had no new battles on the front, she liked to chew on the old ones. Her favorite involved her former husband, a short-haul truck driver she'd divorced after the birth of her third child. "The bastard thought he was quick," she'd say. "But me, I was quicker. I knew he was fooling around, and I knew who he was doing it with. It was this girl named Jeannie Ferraro who lived over on Sullivan Street and thought she had nice teeth. She didn't think I knew nothing, see. She thought I was stupid."

This was the story's key phrase, and it was always followed by a brief pause during which the listener was encouraged to express a healthy degree of outrage. "Stupid, right? So one day I called her, saying I had a coat that didn't fit me no more, and asking her did she want it. It was beautiful, the coat. Fur collar, the best. So she trots over, and when she got here, I asked her to do me a favor and get me a dish towel off the top of the Frigidaire." Rocky would break here and demand that I assume the role of Jeannie Ferraro. "Go ahead," she'd say. "It's a different refrigerator, but I still keep my dish towels in the same place. Stand up and get me one." I'd turn, and just as I was reaching up, she'd grab me by the hair and slam my head into the freezer.

"That's what I did to her, only harder," she'd say. "I did it ten, maybe fifteen times, until her pretty little teeth were lying all over the floor. It left a dent in the Frigidaire the size of a melon, but what the hell. You might not believe it, but I was tough back then."

It was an okay story the first time I heard it.

Why Rocky's Friendship Was Sometimes More Than Taxing

I plugged in a fan one evening, and my lights went out. The refrigerator still worked, but everything else was blown. The super was away, and when I asked Rocky for the key to the basement, she refused, claiming I'd make a mistake and black out the entire building. It seemed unfair that I was paying $1,000 a month to live with no electricity, and when I told her so, she stuck out her lip, saying, "Not five minutes ago you said your refrigerator worked. That's electricity, ain't it?" This was the sort of technicality she loved to grab hold of and twist to suit her purposes. "First you say you got no electricity and then you say you do. Don't waste my time with your stories, Pinnochio. You've got your beer, so go home, you drunk liar." She saw that she'd touched a nerve and moved in to give it a few more jabs. "What, you think I don't know about you and your drinking? I see you sneaking your cans and bottles into the trash every morning, Mr. Fat Face. I know what you are."

In denying her charges, I became the liar she'd accused me of being, and that made me even angrier. We started yelling, and the argument escalated until this seventy-eight-year-old woman put her hands on my chest and started pushing me.

"Come on," she said. "Hit me, you drunk, you liar. You think you're tough? You think I can't kick your ass?"

In the end, I slammed her door so hard her clock fell off the wall.

We didn't speak for a month, but every time I threw out my cans and bottles, I could feel her watching. She knew my schedule and took to delivering food to the elderly couple next door, timing it so I could hear her in the hallway, shouting, "That Greek bastard would die if he knew I was giving this to youse. He thinks I'm his own personal chef, but fuck him. Let him starve. The pansy broke my wall clock, so he's not getting shit out of me."

I missed her, and it bothered me that she could so easily live without my company. When asked how I could ever have considered such a person to be my friend, I'd usually start with her tiny feet and work my way up, concluding with the story about her daughter's dyed hair. "See?" I'd say. "How can you not love a mind like that?"

I held out for as long as I could, and when I eventually knocked on her door, she opened it, saying, "You stupid bastard. Get your ass in here."

It was good to be back.

In the spring of 1996, our landlord died of what Rocky called "asshole cancer," and the building was bought by a real estate conglomerate. The new owners had no patience for her detailed surveillance reports and basically told her to stop bothering them. A representative confiscated her key to the boiler room, and that marked the beginning of the end.

When I'd first moved in, Rocky had been able to walk around the neighborhood and do her own shopping. Now, between one complication and another, she couldn't even make it down the stairs. Her oldest daughter paid to have an air conditioner installed in the living-room window, which effectively blocked her mother's view of the street and made Rocky's world even smaller. Desperate for a little action, she picked up the phone and began drawing fresh prey to her door. I felt sorriest for the deliverymen,

most of whom were recent immigrants unfamiliar with such phrases as "Stuff it up your fat black ass" and "You can't cheat me, you poncho-wearing bastard." When the drugstore stopped delivering, she phoned in her orders and sent me to pick them up. I'd return with her prescriptions and then wait as she examined the receipt with a magnifying glass. There was always some imagined discrepancy, and I'd be sent back to tell the hook-nosed, fat Jew bastard that he owed Mrs. Giordano nine cents. If I was lucky, I could make it back to the store before Rocky picked up the phone and demanded to speak to the manager. If, as was most often the case, I was unlucky, the pharmacist would greet me asking if I was the one looking for the hook-nosed, fat Jew bastard.

The son-of-a-bitching doctors put her on a new blood-pressure medication that somehow caused her feet to swell and led to a fight with the bastards at St. Vincent's, who said that Medicaid wouldn't pay for more than seventy-five dollars of the latest bill unless she turned in three copies of the form they were supposed to send last Tuesday but didn't.

Rocky now used a walker to move from room to room and relied on handrails when bathing and getting off the terlet. Her declining health introduced her to a whole new world of conflict and incompetence, most of which wasn't very interesting. Figuring that I wouldn't want to hear about it without some sort of a premium, she'd call me over saying she had something I could use. Her cooking days were mercifully over, and so she'd give me a Bic pen or a tablespoon or, on one occasion, the warm lightbulb she'd unscrewed from her bedroom closet.

"It's made by the Sylvanians," she said. "It's top of the line, but I don't need it no more. Go on, take it, you bastard."

Having spent a solid year hearing about dosages and blood tests, I was relieved when she developed a theory concerning a pancake-sized stain on her kitchen ceiling. According to her, the couple upstairs had been training their dog to pee on the floor, hoping the urine would seep through and drive her to a nursing home. It was far-fetched, even for Rocky, but it was good to see her using her imagination. Every day she'd ask me to get on the stepladder and cover the stain with white shoe polish, but I always put it off, saying I'd do it tomorrow.

It was Anthony who found her. Rocky kept a club-length two-by-four beside her front door, and he woke to hear her steadily banging it against the wall. She'd given him a spare key in case of an emergency, and he'd entered the apartment to find her lying beside the overturned step stool with a bottle of white shoe polish in her hand. I was in bed when it happened and stepped into the hallway just as they were wheeling her out. As she passed, she looked up at me and raised her hand in a childlike wave so out of character I interpreted it as a joke: the "bye-bye" of a wicked child off to make some trouble. The gurney headed downstairs, and when they reached the fourth floor, I heard Rocky inquire as to the nationality of one of the paramedics. The answer was followed by the scuttle of wheels missing their mark, and then a familiar voice shouting, "If you can't drive a stretcher, what makes you think I'll trust you behind the wheel of a fucking ambulance, you stupid Irish bastard."

The fall that had broken Rocky's hip was followed by a rapid succession of strokes so severe that her hospital roommate mistook her for a mute Puerto Rican. "I haven't heard her talk or anything," the woman said. "She doesn't do nothing but lay there and look at the wall, but she seems like a nice lady. Is she your mother or something?"

I visited a week after the accident and watched as the nurse laid out an afternoon snack: a can of ginger ale, a packet of saltines, a serving of applesauce. Rocky could not even recognize these things as food.

"If she's not going to eat those crackers, I'll take them," her roommate said. "I love crackers but always forget to buy them when I go to the store. I don't know why, but I do." She smiled and reached for one of the stuffed animals that crowded her bedside table. "Denise gave me this puppy last year when they took some veins out of my leg. My grandbabies keep pestering me for it, and I always say, 'Snoopy came to see me, not you!' Sometimes, I like to joke around, but, oh, I'll probably give it to them when I get out. My Garfield, though, now there's a story behind him. One time . . . "

I waved my hands in front of Rocky's face and was grateful to get no response whatsoever. She definitely had some sins to account for, but having to endure this constant prattle was a punishment not even she could have dreamed up.

The conspiracy theory was off the mark, but Rocky's prediction was eventually proved right. The stain on her ceiling did lead her to a nursing home. She was transferred by ambulance after spending two months in the hospital and died, at age eighty-two, on the day of her arrival. A month later, Anthony died as well, followed by his wife and the 104-year-old woman who lived on the third floor. One after another, their apartments were remodeled and taken over by enthusiastic young people who swore by their laptops and sped to work on roller blades, never knowing that somebody used to be in charge. I might have knocked on their doors and told them a thing or two, but it somehow seemed easier just to mind my own business and leave the bastards alone.