Paging God... paging God... Would God please report immediately to terminal C, gate 17?

When I was told that they'd canceled the two o'clock flight from Boston to Portland Maine, my first instinct was to lie down on the floor and cry. Timewise, the delay was hardly the end of the world: My business wouldn't begin until the following morning, but still, the news was crushing. The cancellation was a reminder that I do not govern the activities of major airports, which seems obvious enough but always comes as a terrible shock when stated out loud.

Like most people, I've constructed an elaborate house of cards based on the concept that I control the world around me. The hotels in which I stay do not catch fire because I do not want them to, and my planes stay aloft for the same reason. What religious people call fate, I call luck, and what they call God's will, I call bad luck. Accept a canceled flight and suddenly you're on a roll, opening yourself to the possibilities of tax audits and spinal-cord injuries. Anything can happen once the precedent's been set.

The news was disappointing, but I might have sulked a lot harder had my earlier flight not included a bald five-year-old traveling with a couple I guessed to be his parents. Boys that age do not generally shave their heads, and so I, along with everyone else, naturally assumed he had cancer. When adults get sick, it's commonly decided that they brought it upon themselves-Constance held grudges; Marty destroyed his heart with buttered popcorn. It's our pathetic way of insisting that the same thing could never happen to us. But it's sort of hard to blame a child. I mean, what, did he teethe too hard?

It was a hot, crowded flight, and we spent an hour on the runway, waiting to take off. The beverage service was canceled due to turbulence, but rather than complain, we looked at the bald five-year-old, realizing that a free Dr. Pepper doesn't mean very much when held against a sick and possibly dying child. No one said anything, but you could tell we were all thinking the same thing:

No beverage service? Oh, that's okay, but can't you round up a bag of pretzels for our little friend in 11-B?

It was one of those rare moments when a group of strangers comes together in a spirit of quiet benevolence. Had the pilot announced a request for bone marrow, we would have given it. Had he thrown in a few thousand bonus miles, the flight attendants could have walked away with a sackful of warm kidneys.

Logan Airport: isn't terribly lively on a Sunday afternoon. My rescheduled plane was supposed to leave at three-thirty, and I returned to the gate a half hour early to find that it, too, had been canceled, this time due to "bad weather." At this point, I started wondering if the bald child hadn't been a plant, a professional Tiny Tim shuttled from city to city in order to keep the customers quiet and reflective. I'm normally not that suspicious, but this was an airline that tended to schedule regular, hourly flights and then systematically cancel them until they'd collected enough victims to fill an entire plane.

The ticket agent's name tag identified her as Pamela D. She was a pale, redheaded woman who'd framed her stained teeth with an unflattering coat of thick, liver-colored lipstick. Even her voice was rusty, worn ragged from barking identical orders to seemingly identical passengers.

It was warm and sunny in Boston, and when I asked if conditions were truly that different 110 miles to the north, she cut me off, saying that neither she nor her associates were personally responsible for the weather.

Though she seemed entirely capable of brewing a storm, I hadn't actually accused her of anything. "Listen," I said, "I just wanted to know if-"

Again she cut me off, saying there was no reason to raise my voice. I'd been speaking in my normal, conversational tone, and when I repeated the question at half my regular volume, she instructed me to step away from the counter and return when I was ready to behave like an adult. Which meant never.

There's really nothing to be done in such situations, but I'm always happy to latch on to someone who thinks otherwise. On this particular occasion, that someone was a self-proclaimed scholar who looked to be in her mid-fifties. The woman was scheduled to deliver a speech at a Portland-area college and informed the ticket agent that her time was extremely valuable.

"You people exist from one coffee break to the next," she said, "but that's not how things work in academia. This trip was arranged months ago. Notices have been sent, and come eight o'clock this evening, an auditorium full of people will be waiting to hear what I have to say."

This failed to impress Pamela D., who categorized the alleged foul weather as an unfortunate "act of God."

"Don't spout your tripe to me," the scholar said. "The others might buy it, but I'm an educator and can sniff a lie from a mile away."

I wasn't sure what this woman taught but guessed that it might have something to do with really big jewelry. She wore a ring on every finger, a huge pair of boxy, copper earrings, and, around her neck, a coaster-sized medallion embossed with the figures of wrestling Athenians. With the possible exception of an armor-suited knight, she was a metal detector's worst nightmare.

"I'm on to you, missy," she said, walking toward the bank of pay phones. "You and your whole stinking organization.

At four o'clock, I heard a rumor that we might be boarding at four-thirty. Come five, word on the street was that we'd get moving just as soon as the baggage was loaded. At around six, Pamela D. and her associates herded us onto a bus we assumed would carry us to our plane. Twenty minutes later, as we sat stalled on the dark tarmac, we were informed that our flight attendant had called in sick and that we would be unable to proceed without her. No one was happy, but the scholar took it harder than most.

"What the hell!" she shouted. "If you're looking for volunteers, I'll stand at the door and tell everyone to have a nice goddamned day."

Oh, I thought, I like you.

This is a mistake I happen to make with depressing regularity. Given the choice of dozens of sane and perfectly decent candidates, I always attach myself to the loudmouths seconds before they reveal themselves to be psychotic. It's the price I pay for being both a natural-born follower and an overly enthusiastic listener. The scholar had been talking for hours, but unless she was crabbing at the airline personnel, her comments had not been directed at anyone in particular. Rather, she just spoke, hoping that sooner or later someone would meet her eye and agree to play the role of her listener. I accepted the challenge, and by the time we left the bus, I was carrying her luggage.

Ours was a relatively undemanding relationship, as I wasn't expected to have opinions and conspiracy theories of my own. My role was to take up the rear, occasionally stoking the fire with a well placed "You've got that right" or "I couldn't agree more." I liked her, in part, because it was easy.

Back in the terminal, she cornered Pamela D., who claimed that because her illness was weather related, the missing flight attendant was yet another act of God. "Therefore," she said, "we cannot be held accountable for her absence."

This did not sit well with the scholar, who pounded the countertop and demanded to hear the airline's official definition of God.

Pamela D. offered that He was, you know, Jesus's dad, and the scholar shouted that this wasn't good enough. "The Romans defined their gods," she yelled. "The Jews, even the Aztecs, but your people can't quite put their finger on Him, can they? Oh, you'll use His name when one of your girls calls in sick, but when the time comes to get specific, you're no better than the goddamned Unitarians."

Pamela D. was not trained to discuss theology. She asked what the Unitarians had to with anything, but the scholar ignored the question.

"You're telling me that God plays an active role in your organization, that He basically works here and makes all the important decisions. And I'm telling you that as an extremely dissatisfied customer, I want to talk to Him. Right now."

Pamela D. mentioned an interdenominational chapel at the far end of the United terminal, and the scholar rolled her eyes, saying, "Where do they find you people, in a cave?" She then demanded to speak to a supervisor, saying, "Hurry along, now. Chop-chop."

Pamela D. left her station, and in her absence I was treated to a dramatic reenactment of their conversation. "She said it was an 'act of God,' so I said, 'Define God!' That got her, all right. I mean, what if some of us don't believe in Him? What then? This isn't a church, so why bring religion into it? I said, 'If God works here, let me have a word with Him!' Ha! That put a cork in her faucet. I said, 'Where do they find you people, in a cave?'"

A white-haired man looked up from his paper and turned his head in our direction. "Oh, give it a rest," he said. "We're not going anywhere until they find a flight attendant, so why don't the two of you just shut up?"

The two of you. In the minds of our fellow passengers, the woman and I were now a team-the Sid and Nancy of interfaith love and tolerance.

Back away slowly, I thought. Just keep moving and no one will get hurt. I inched toward the departure gate, and the scholar grabbed my shoulder.

"They're all sheep," she told me. "Happy to sit on their haunches until someone opens the gates and shoos them to pasture. Joe Schmo misses his Sunday dinner, and fine, it's ultimately no big deal, but I have a lecture to deliver." She rooted through her purse for a throat lozenge, and then, squinting at the figures approaching in the distance, she turned to me, shouting, "Well, wouldn't you know it. I asked to speak to the guy in charge and they send me the biggest, fattest bull dyke in the entire city of Boston."

This was a mistake, as technically the biggest, fattest bull dyke in the entire city of Boston was not the approaching supervisor but rather the titanic female rugby player sprawled before us on the carpet. The second-, third-, and fourth-biggest bull dykes were undoubtedly her three teammates, who leaned against the nearby wall, exhaling what appeared to be steam.

It suddenly seemed wise to break rank and express my considerable interest in all-state female rugby.

"It's a great sport," I told my new friends. "Definitely more exciting than old what's-her-name. God, don't you just hate women like her?"

It took them a while to accept me, but when the rugby players eventually got to talking, my only wish was that they'd shut up. The supervisor had entered the waiting area, and the confrontation between her and the scholar was much more interesting than a detailed account of last season's losing streak. I heard snippets of the previous argument laced with accusations against the airline personnel, whom the scholar referred to alternately as either "nitwits" or "your girls," as in, "I didn't expect to find any brain trusts, but you've hired some first-class nitwits, haven't you? I ask a question and your girls just stand there, giving me lip."

The supervisor was a remarkably patient woman who exuded an air of genuine concern. She stood as if for sentencing, her eyes lowered and one hand folded over the other, Occasionally interrupting to offer an apology. No, God was not on the official airline payroll, and yes, it was wrong of the ticket agent to suggest otherwise. "Like everyone, they sometimes forget themselves and say things they don't mean. If they've offended you in any way..." She absorbed the scholar's anger much as a plant takes in the sunlight, gradually raising her head and growing visibly heartier with each dose. This liveliness was reflected in a series of cheerful platitudes dedicated to the theme of overcoming adversity and punctuated by the phrase "Que sera, sera."

"When life hands me a lemon, I give it a squeeze, add some sugar, and hey, Que sera, sera!"

Did she even know what it meant?

The peppier she was, the louder and more self-important the scholar became, inciting laughter rather than the respect she had demanded. An audience gathered, sitting on trash cans and identical rolling suitcases. Conversation stopped, heads snapped to attention, and storm clouds raced south from the city of Portland, where a crowd of learned people faced an empty podium, wondering what had become of tonight's featured speaker.